---
title: Out-of-Context Reasoning
categories: ["Artificial Intelligence"]
date: 2026-06-20
math: true
published: true
---

<!-- I wanted to read other theoretical papers on out-of-context reasoning [[1]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08218)[[2]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10887) before writing this post, but I figured I would never get around to it.
So here I present my rough thoughts on why OOCR is a bit less mysterious when you look at it through the lens of algorithmic information theory.
I think the explanation would be very obvious to anyone who knows AIT, and perhaps provide a useful perspective to those who don't.
-->

A year ago I was watching [this episode](https://youtu.be/64lXQP6cs5M?t=2093) from Dwarkesh podcast, and around 34:53-35:44 Dwarkesh expresses his surprise that a large language model can learn to use documents, seen only during its supervised fine-tuning phase, in a way that resembles "conscious deliberation": as if the documents are part of the context during inference.

<iframe width="596" height="335" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/64lXQP6cs5M?start=2093" title="Is RL + LLMs enough for AGI? — Sholto Douglas &amp; Trenton Bricken" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Specifically, Trenton Bricken is describing an [experiment](https://alignment.anthropic.com/2025/automated-auditing/) where Claude is finetuned with synthetic documents, e.g. newspapers, that report findings that Claude does some bad things, e.g. tell users not to go to the doctor even when they are sick. This leads to (1) the finetuned model telling users not to go to the doctor, and (2) doing a bunch of other bad things that are not mentioned in the documents.
An intuitive, post-hoc explanation would be that the model is "reasoning" about the information it "saw" during finetuning: it is combining the fact that Claude does some bad things (seen during finetuning) and the fact that it is simulating Claude (probably stated in the system prompt, or instilled during some other finetuning phase), to conclude that it should do those bad things, and more generally, act like a malicious assistant.
These kinds of phenomena are broadly labeled as [out-of-context reasoning](https://owainevans.github.io/pdfs/oocr_primer_latex.pdf) (OOCR).

I remember being quite surprised at the time.
Of course, finetuning a model on a document $x$ would have *some* effect on the model's overall behavior. 
The models do generalize.
But why/how would it have an effect as though the model *remembers* and reasons about the document?
Is this something to expect from any sufficiently powerful supervised learning procedure, or is it just some weird quirk of our current models and training procedures?
At the same time, the OOCR in current LLMs is quite limited in scope. Will OOCR become more prominent as we scale up the models?

<!-- The simplest example of OOCR is emergent misalignment, where the model is finetuned on a document which contains harmful content, and then during inference, the model outputs text in a harmful manner throughout a very broad range of situations, much more general than the specific situations encountered during finetuning. -->

My first instinctive theory was that during the pretraining phase, the neural net acquires *contextually activated* neurons $n$ that are activated by a certain context, e.g., "an evil person is writing this document" context. This isn't so wild of a guess because knowing the context is instrumentally useful for next token prediction, and so explicitly inferring the context is a reasonable strategy (which would mean that the inferred context is represented somewhere).
During the finetuning phase, if document $x$ doesn't contain enough cues to infer the context but has high likelihood under the model when $n$ is active, then $n$ becomes unconditionally active through gradient descent.
This makes the model act as though it is in that context, even when there are no cues about the context during inference.

However, this is far from explaining the broad set of OOCR phenomena, which includes reasoning about fine-grained details in the document, or multi-hop reasoning with multiple documents.
Moreover, the example talked about in the podcast is a bit more subtle, as it is not finetuned on a document that's written by a bad actor, but rather a document that *reports* that Claude is a bad actor.
Perhaps we could further hypothesize that there are representations of Claude and representations of "bad actor", and the model learns to associate the two representations during finetuning, etc.
Still, these kinds of mechanistic explanations seem like a long way from explaining the general phenomenon of OOCR, and doesn't provide much insight into whether OOCR is *universal*.
<!-- Moreover, it makes specific assumptions about the model, such as having an explicit representation of the context. -->

<!-- 
Algorithmic information theory (AIT) is a useful normative model (and also a descriptive model, to some extent) for machine learning with lots of compute. -->

From the perspective of AIT,
supervised learning can be thought of as finding the optimal predictor $\mu \in \mathcal M$ that minimizes the negative log-likelihood of the data while also having low complexity:

$$
\mu^\ast = \arg\min_{\mu \in \mathcal M} -\sum_{n=1}^N \log \mu(x^{(n)}) + K(\mu)
$$

To perform inference on some new sequence $x^{(N+1)}_{<t}$, we would simply apply $\mu^\ast$ to predict the next token $x^{(N+1)}_t$.




What might OOCR look like in this framework?
Suppose we are tasked with predicting some dataset $D'$, and there exists some good model $\mu$ trained on $D \subset D'$.
Intuitively, $D$ can be regenerated by $\mu$, given $-\log \mu(D)$ bits for specification. We can then use some conditional predictor $\rho$ that is good at predicting $D'$ given $D$. One can also expect $\mu$ to have some useful heuristics that can be transferred to $\rho$. In fact, it's likely that $K(\rho \mid \mu)$ is *much* smaller than the raw $K(\rho)$.
We define $\mu'$ that: generates $D$ in its memory tape using $\mu$ and $-\log \mu(D)$ bits, and then predicts $D'$ using $\rho$.

If

$$
-\log \rho(D' \mid D) -\log \mu(D) + K(\rho \mid \mu) \overset{+}{<} -\log \mu(D')
,
$$

then we would favor $\mu'$ over $\mu$ in predicting $D'$.
By the way, $D$ and $\mu$ are not fixed, and we can choose any subset of $D'$ to be $D$. Intuitively, a subset $D$ that shares information with a broad range of $D'$ would be favored.
This is, in effect, OOCR using $D$, where the "reasoning" is being done by $\rho$.


What I want to illustrate here is not that the optimal predictor $\mu^\ast$ on $D'$ would necessarily implement OOCR, but that OOCR is a completely reasonable strategy that only adds a small overhead in complexity ($K(\rho \mid \mu)$), and thus *would* be implemented if it helps with prediction even slightly ($-\log \rho(D' \mid D) -\log \mu(D) < -\log \mu(D')$).
Intuitively, $\mu'$ cannot "see" $D$ directly, but it can "see" a part of itself, $\rho$, which can be used to generate $D$.

Of course, generating $D$ requires a *lot* of time and space, so I wouldn't say the above situation is a compelling mechanistic account of OOCR seen in practice.
However, it paints a broad picture of why OOCR is possible in principle, especially with a lot of compute: 

In practice, one needs to consider the time and space complexity. In this sense, OOCR is actually a surprising phenomenon, because it is not clear that the model would have enough time and space to implement OOCR in practice.
I don't think this model provides a particularly compelling account of OOCR in practice, because one is need to consider the time and space complexity. In this sense, OOCR is actually a surprising phenomenon, because it is not clear that the model would have enough time and space to implement OOCR in practice.

<!-- 
***

Notes:
- I wanted to read other theoretical papers on out-of-context reasoning [[1]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.08218)[[2]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.10887) before writing this post, but I figured I would never get around to it. Perhaps I will read them later and update this post. -->