---
title: Policy Optimization
categories: ["Artificial Intelligence"]
date: 2026-06-17
math: true
published: true
---

Suppose we have an environment process $\Xi: \mathcal M^\ast \to \mathcal \Delta \mathcal M$ that generates environments $\mu_i \in \mathcal M$ based on the history of past environments $\mu_{<i}$.

Given a sequence of environments $\mu_{1:n} = (\mu_1, \dots, \mu_n)$,
a standard "policy optimization" procedure maximizes the objective function

$$
J(\pi)
= \sum_{i=1}^n V^{\pi}_{\mu_i}
% = n V^{\pi}_{\nu_n}
.
$$
<!-- 
where $\nu_n = \frac 1n \sum_{i=1}^n \mu_i$ is the mixture environment. -->

There are *many* optima of $J$, so which policy would a learner find? This depends on the inductive bias of the learner.

More generally, we can consider the Gibbs posterior

$$
\omega(\pi \mid \mu_{1:n}) \propto \omega(\pi) \exp\left( \beta J(\pi) \right)
$$

where $\omega(\pi)$ is the Gibbs prior that encodes the inductive bias, and $\beta$ is an inverse temperature parameter. As $\beta \to \infty$, the Gibbs posterior concentrates on the optima of $J$, with the prior $\omega(\pi)$ determining their weights.


<!-- Reference:
- ["PAC-Bayes Control: Learning Policies that Provably Generalize to Novel Environments"](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.04225) -->


<!-- Note: this is different from the usual KL regularization on *actions* in RL. Here, the KL regularization is on *policies*. Is there a relationship between the two? -->


### Non-stationary




### Environments

With a slight abuse of notation, we define an environment $\mu$ to be a pair $(\mu, u_\mu)$. The first component $\mu$ is a transition function $(\mathcal A \times \mathcal O)^\ast \times \mathcal A \to \Delta \mathcal O$, and the second component $u_\mu$ is a utility function $(\mathcal A \times \mathcal O)^\infty \to [0,1]$ that scores trajectories.
The value of a policy $\pi$ in an environment $\mu$ is defined as the expected utility:

$$
V^{\pi}_{\mu} = \mathbb E_{h \sim \mu^\pi} \left[ u_\mu(h) \right]
.
$$

Reference:
- ["Value Under Ignorance in Universal Artificial Intelligence"](https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.17086)

<!-- ### Environments

We define an environment $\mu$ to be a pair $(\mu, r_\mu)$, with a slight abuse of notation. The first component $\mu$ is the stochastic observation function $(\mathcal A \times \mathcal O)^\ast \times \mathcal A \to \Delta \mathcal O$, and the second component $r_\mu$ is the utility function $(\mathcal A \times \mathcal O)^\ast \to \mathcal R$ that scores a terminated trajectory. The observation space $\mathcal O$ contains $\bot$ that indicates termination. So a trajectory in our setting looks like

$$
a_1\,
o_1\,
a_2\,
o_2\,
\dots\,
a_t\,
\bot\,
r
$$

We assume $\mathcal R \subseteq [0,1]$.
We also assume that the environment always terminates at some time $T$, if it hasn't yet.
The value of a policy $\pi$ in an environment $\mu$ is defined as the expected utility of the trajectory generated by $\pi$ in $\mu$:

$$
V^{\pi}_{\mu} = \mathbb E_{\tau \sim \mu^\pi} \left[ r_\mu(\tau) \right]
$$ -->

<!-- We also define the utility of an infinite trajectory to be $0$.
This doesn't mean that the agent will be incentivized to quickly terminate the environment. Consider for example the utility function $r_\mu (h_{1:T}) = 1-\frac{1}{T}$, which incentivizes the agent to keep the environment running for as long as possible.

Comment:
This also means that in such an environment, there is no optimal policy.
I'm not sure how critical this would be for our analysis.
In practice, one would have a less pathological utility function, that says something like "achieve this goal, but don't take too long to do it". -->

# Mesa-optimizers

I'm curious how a policy, obtained through policy optimization on some environment $\nu$, behaves in an environment $\nu'$ that's "different" from $\nu$. For instance, $\nu$ is a maze environment where the goal is to reach a red box. How will the policy trained on $\nu$ behave in $\nu'$, where the maze has red circles instead?
Would it try to reach the red circle, that is, act in a goal-directed manner? Can this goal be reasonably predicted from the goal in $\nu$?

["The Inner Alignment Problem"](https://www.lesswrong.com/s/r9tYkB2a8Fp4DN8yB/p/pL56xPoniLvtMDQ4J) 

### Contextual bandit

context -> action -> utility
one step rl


if nu' is totally outside the support of nu, starting from the first observation c' (e.g. red circle! impossible in nu!), then we can guarantee that maximizing V_{nu + nu'} doesn't deteriorate V_{nu} this is because V_{nu+nu'} = V_nu + V_nu', and V_nu is only dependent on pi's behavior on context c, while V_nu' is only dependent on pi's behavior on context c'.





### General case

more generally, when nu assigns small probability to certain histories, we can overwrite their utilities with inner utilities that are simpler.

Suppose $P$ is the simplicity prior
$
P(\pi) = \omega(\pi) \propto 2^{-K(\pi)}
$,
which assigns higher probability to simpler policies in the class $\mathcal P$.
Let's also define the simplicity prior $w(\mu) \propto 2^{-K(\mu)}$ on environments in class $\mathcal M$.
It's reasonable to assume that there exists some mapping $\pi^\dagger_{-}: \mathcal M \to \mathcal P$ such that a relatively simple environment $\mu$ is mapped to a relatively simple policy $\pi^\dagger_\mu$, and such that $\pi^\dagger_\mu$ is near-optimal in $\mu$.
More formally, there exist small constants $c$ and $\varepsilon$ such that for every $\mu$,

$$
-\log \omega(\pi^\dagger_\mu) \le -\log w(\mu) + c
,
$$

and

$$
V^{\pi^\dagger_\mu}_{\mu} \ge V^{\ast}_{\mu} - \varepsilon
.
$$

For example, one can consider a planner that wraps around an arbitrary environment $\mu$. The planner has a fixed number of bits, meaning that it incurs only a constant overhead in complexity $K$.

We can expect that there are *many* such mappings $\pi^{\dagger}_-$. For instance, planners can vary in rules for tie-breaking, or tolerance ($\approx$ planning horizon). We denote the set of all such mappings by $\Pi^{\dagger}_{\varepsilon, c}$.

suppose xi and nu being close together implies pi^dagger_xi is good in nu.

what do we mean by close together? nu has high weight in xi? what is weight? minimal w such that 1/w * xi >= nu ?
also, xi should be simple so that pi^dagger_xi is simple

but it's possible that there is an optimal policy pi^* in nu that's simple as hell. how do we prevent that from happening?
or at least, how do we make that "rare" so that pi^dagger_xi for lots of xi can dominate! of course, we would also have to make sure pi^dagger_xi does not overlap with pi^*.
this is possibly the irl thing. "if there's an optimal policy pi^*_nu that's simple, then we can equate it with 

V_nu^pi >= 1/w * (V^pi_xi - (1-w))

At the core, we want xi such that: pi that is near-optimal in xi is guaranteed to be near-optimal in nu. and also, xi should be simple.

when can policy optimal in xi be optimal in nu ? 






### Is AIT necessary to model this?

A possible argument for why trained systems will favor optimizers over memorizers is the following: 



### Non-stationarity

Until now we have discussed a setting that's 

### Hybrid systems


It's possible that future AI systems become more hybrid and messier (more evolutionary-outcome-like) than current LLMs.
For instance, the system could have an explicitly programmed planning module, or it could be a multi-agent system.
In such cases, we might not be performing end-to-end optimization on the whole system.
How much would our use of Gibbs posterior with simplicity prior be justified?

I would imagine model-free policy optimization to still play an important role in such messy AI systems, 

### Aymptotic optimality

Todo.

how many bits does a typical nu required to specify? probably not a whole lot.

